# Manually-commanded-ftp-client
Manually commanded ftp client (Python inteactive prompt)

Making this way of connecting to ftp server my aim was to elucidate how an ftp client work in the low level. You can see as you do it the process step by step.  

There are two channel: first, command channel (default port: 21), secondly, data channel (no default port, the port number is generated by the server again and again). Therefore you need to create and connect more sockets in order to grab a file. 

The commands are binaries (b'...\r\n'), following the standards. The receiving puffer size can be other (less).

Testing with vsftpd ftp server daemon, you need to give permission for anonymous login.
  $ sudo nano /etc/vsftpd.conf
Change NO to YES on the proper line: 
  Allow anonymous FTP? (Disabled by default).
  anonymous_enable=YES

The test file ('test.txt') is located in /srv/ftp directory, the default directory of vsftpd, with the text: 'this is the content of the test file for testing manually commanded python ftp client\n'

Enjoy the process!



#Start python interctive prompt

...@linux:~$ python3
Python 3.6.9 (default, Jan 26 2021, 15:33:00) 
[GCC 8.4.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.

>>> import socket

Make the first socket for commands:
>>> s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)

Connect it to the standard ftp command port:
>>> s.connect(('127.0.0.1', 21))

Send username (anonym login user 'ftp'):
>>> s.send(b'USER ftp\r\n')
Here you are the number of bytes sended:
10

Send password (anonym login password 'ftp'):
>>> s.send(b'PASS ftp\r\n')
10

Receive feedback:
>>> s.recv(2048)
b'220 (vsFTPd 3.0.3)\r\n331 Please specify the password.\r\n230 Login successful.\r\n'

Make passive mode for getting the data port number generated by the server:
>>> s.send(b'PASV\r\n')
6

Receive feedback with the open port to connect for data stream
>>> s.recv(2048)
b'227 Entering Passive Mode (127,0,0,1,161,195).\r\n'

Calculate the port number from the received code above:
(127,0,0,1, 161 = x, 195 = y)
Port number = (x * 256) + y, so:

>>> 161 * 256
41216
>>> 41216 + 195
41411

The open data port's number of the server for sending data is: 41411.
Make the second socket for data:
>>> q = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)

Connect the second socket to the open data port:
>>> q.connect(('127.0.0.1', 41411))

Send command for listing current directory with the first socket (s):
>>> s.send(b'LIST\r\n')
6

Get the data with the second socket(q), a list of the current directory with the test file:
>>> q.recv(4096)
b'
aaa.txt\r\n drwxr-xr-x
...
ftp_test_file\r\n drwxr-xr-x  4 1000 1000 Oct 20 15:01
...
zzz.txt\r\n drwxr-xr-x'

Entering passive mode again for a new opened data port number:
>>> s.send(b'PASV\r\n')
6
>>> s.recv(1024)
b'227 Entering Passive Mode (127,0,0,1,54,158).\r\n'

Calculate the port number:
>>> 54 * 256
13824
>>> 13824 + 158
13982
Make a new socket, the third, for grabbing the content of the file:
>>> r = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)

Connect the third socket to the open data port:
>>> r.connect(('127.0.0.1', 13982))

Send command with the first socket (s):
>>> s.send(b'RETR test.txt\r\n')
16

Get data with the third socket (r):
>>> r.recv(4096)
b'this is the content of the test file for testing manually commanded python ftp client\n'

Check whether more data are or not:
>>> r.recv(4096)
b''

If no, close the sockets:
>>> s.close()
>>> q.close()
>>> r.close()
And say hello, vawe good-by:
>>> exit()

